1.      How relevant is this submission to the scope of JEDM? (if applicable: to the targeted special issue?)

	This submission is very relevant to the scope of JEDM. In particular, the work focuses on data mining within the MOOC environment. By analyzing student behaviors with MOOC's user-system logs, the authors address issues involving student interactions in emerging pedagogical environments. 
	
2.      How novel is the described research? Are the authors aware of related work?

	One of the authors' main innovative claims is their two-layer hidden Markov model. The idea of layered hidden Markov models is not new in and of itself. They state that " A main technical contribution of this paper is to propose a more general HMM ... the major deviation of our model from the traditional HMM is that our observations are themselves sequences" This idea is presented succinctly on the Wikipedia page for "Layered hidden Markov model." Additionally, there appears to be a fair amount of literature on two-layer and multi-layer hidden Markov models. “Modeling Individual and Group Actions in Meetings: A Two-Layer HMM Framework" by Zhang et al. seems to use a similar approach. The authors' related works do not reference papers using similar methods in different domains. 

	The authors do, however, reference other papers that use various methods to solve problems in the same domain. In this regard, the authors' results, analysis, and figures are both novel and interesting. 

3.      What is the scientific contribution of this submission? Is it clearly explained, in terms of how the paper advances the EDM field or contributes to related fields?

	The main scientific contribution of this submission is the temporal/transitional characterization of student learning behaviors. The authors' analysis provides detailed insights into student behavior in MOOCs. The authors explain in a broad sense that this submission bridges a gap in unsupervised learning methods for automatically discovering and characterizing student learning behavior patterns. Although the method is indeed unsupervised, many of the compelling observations seem to require a decent amount of manual investigation into the model's results. That is not to say that the outcomes fail to contribute to the EDM field - more so that they are simply mischaracterized in the text. 

4.      Is the work technically sound? Are there enough methodological details? Are claims convincingly substantiated, either through theoretical argument or empirical data?

	The authors' primary method appears to be technically sound via mathematical explanation. They present the definitions of the methods that their work is based on (hidden Markov models and the Baum-Welch algorithm), and they show fairly clearly how they make a slight modification to prior work in order to obtain their results. Additionally, it appears that much effort has gone into discovering knowledge from their model's output. 

5.      Do the authors describe the limitations of their approach in a satisfactory manner?

	The authors make few if any references to limitations of their approach in the paper. It is not clear what challenges they faced or how they mitigated those issues. 

6.      How significant is the research? Will the paper be likely to have an impact on the community?

	The research is fairly significant in this community. Learning is a dynamic process and the authors' transition analysis can help push the community into deeper, more complex inquiry into online educational behavior. On the other hand, the knowledge discovered by this paper seems to have required significant investigation into the model outputs. It is somewhat questionable that the community will be able to use this method to effectively improve MOOCs at a large scale. 

7.      Does the title of this paper clearly and sufficiently reflect its contents?

	The title is simple and mostly accurate. The title could be better if it more specifically reflected the unique insights into MOOC student behavior that this work develops. 

8.      Are the presentation, organization and length satisfactory?

	The paper is well organized and the length is satisfactory. There are a few problems with the presentation. According to the JEDM format, captions for tables must occur above the table, while captions for figures must be below. Both tables are improperly captioned. There are a few grammatical errors decreasing the readability of the paper, mostly near the beginning. The style guide mentions that the abstract should be between 100-250 words, but the abstract in this work is 86 words. 

9.      Can you suggest additions or amendments or an introductory statement that will increase the value of this paper?

	Amendments to the introduction and related works would be extremely helpful. These sections misrepresent the contributions of the paper. Additionally, the related works section is missing acknowledgements of literature utilizing layered hidden Markov models. The abstract is a bit too short, and focuses much more on the method than the knowledge discovery accomplished by this work. 

10.  Can you suggest any reductions in the paper, or deletions of parts?

	The sections of this paper are well formed and are not in need of serious reductions, besides for amendments to existing parts. 

11.  Are the illustrations and tables necessary and acceptable?

	The figures and tables are well utilized in this paper. For the most part they are visually pleasing, though some of the smaller text is overlapped by lines. The figures and their descriptions definitely point out the potential analysis one can perform using the authors' method. 

12.  Are the key words and abstracts/summary informative?

13.  Is the paper
(a) acceptable for publication in its present form?
(b) acceptable for publication with minor revisions?
(c) acceptable for publication with major revisions only?
(d) unacceptable for publication, even with major revisions?

This paper is (c) - acceptable for publication with major revisions. 

14.  To what extent does this paper fall within your area of expertise?
(X) fully 
() well 
() partially 
() hardly

15.  Please list any other general comments or specific suggestions below.

	The analysis in the "Experiment Results" section is insightful. It is not really clear how the comparisons between different figures were made. Did the authors manually inspect their figures and draw connections between them? Did the model truly "automatically discover and characterize" these results? Some of the claims at the beginning of the paper do not feel substantiated by the methods and results. The problem is not the research itself, but rather the way that the text frames the questions/outcomes. 



