1.      How relevant is this submission to the scope of JEDM? (if applicable: to the targeted special issue?)


The topic itself, categorizing subsequences of actions in a learning management system, is quite relevant.


2.      How novel is the described research? Are the authors aware of related work?


It is somewhat novel, but the authors do not seem to be adequately aware of related work in the methodology contribution. They seem to be even less aware of substantive work in education.


3.      What is the scientific contribution of this submission? Is it clearly explained, in terms of how the paper advances the EDM field or contributes to related fields?

This paper presents a novel method for learning categories of action sequences from MOOC clickstream logs. Although the authors have done a bit of background research on approaches to MOOC activity sequences, the educational content knowledge is very thin. The approach is under-theorized and does not adequately address the “why are you doing this” question. The paper is on shaky ground because it attempts to do two things and does neither well. The first is develop a new method. The second is apply the method to learn about behavior patterns in MOOCs.

The method itself is a twist on Markov switching models or on mixtures of Markov Chains and appears to be very related to the following works, which are not referenced:

Hamilton, J. D. (1990). Analysis of time series subject to changes in regime. Journal of Econometrics, 45(1-2):39–70.

Song, Y., Keromytis, A. D., & Stolfo, S. J. (2009, February). Spectrogram: A Mixture-of-Markov-Chains Model for Anomaly Detection in Web Traffic. In NDSS (Vol. 9, pp. 1-15).

Gupta, R., Kumar, R., & Vassilvitskii, S. (2016). On Mixtures of Markov Chains. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (pp. 3441-3449).


The last reference is admittedly recent and used spectral methods. However, the important point is that these above references all offer more systematic descriptions of model properties, for example by studying the recoverability of parameters in a simulation study. (Note that the Gupta et al. reference showed that EM estimation was error-prone and needed to be run on the order of 1000 times to recover parameters as well as the spectral approach.)




4.      Is the work technically sound? Are there enough methodological details? Are claims convincingly substantiated, either through theoretical argument or empirical data?

The current manuscript does not adequately develop the methodology for review on its technical soundness, and therefore the application is premature. Much of the substantive conclusions are the results of Rorschach-test-y looking at graphs. There are selective statistical tests performed which violate some basic principles of statistical practice.

The issue of temporal grain size/resolution seems important, but is very mysterious once the method is actually described. As it is sold, one would expect the model itself to determine when the (latent) state has switched. But it appears that the authors simply chose a cutoff to divide sequences into “one day’s worth of activity.” Why is that a reasonable choice? And why should tomorrow’s latent state depend on today’s state (which they do in a HMM)? Also, the semantics/combinatorics is unclear. The authors make it sound like the observable “state” is a sequence, which would suggest a staggering cardinality of the observable variable (O(10^L) for sequences of length L). Rather, it seems that the observable is one of N possible Markov chains, corresponding to the cardinality of latent variable.

While the idea of breaking up a longer sequence of observed actions into shorter subsequences which are each characterized by a latent state is interesting, the usefulness of this approach in the present paper is less clear. The authors overstate the degree to which this method will help to automatically infer student behaviors, as much of the interpretability of the results still rests on human readings of the Markov chains. Moreover, the discoveries do not go beyond obvious findings like “watching video” states and “reading forum thread” states. It’s hard to say this from reviewing the figures alone, but the states seem to be characterized almost entirely by the self-loops in the Markov chain. If that is the case, then surely simpler averaging methods are reasonable. 



5.      Do the authors describe the limitations of their approach in a satisfactory manner?

I would not say so. The authors seem to suggest that this method solves all of the problems of inferring behavior in MOOC learner data.


6.      How significant is the research? Will the paper be likely to have an impact on the community?

The method is not convincingly developed, and the results offer no insights that seem to merit this approach. If at least the method were better described, I think the community might find useful applications of it.



7.      Does the title of this paper clearly and sufficiently reflect its contents?

I would suggest that the authors consider an alternative to the name “two-layer hidden Markov model.” The model does not have two hidden layers, and the mixture/switching of Markov chains seems more apt. The abbreviation TL for two-layer also seems ill-advised, since three-layer would have the same result.
 

8.      Are the presentation, organization and length satisfactory?

The introductory section should be shortened, since the details on prior work are delayed for too long.


9.      Can you suggest additions or amendments or an introductory statement that will increase the value of this paper?

The method needs significantly more rigorous development.  Stylistically, the authors should try to be less boastful about the utility of this method, which is much more dubious than they make out.



10.  Can you suggest any reductions in the paper, or deletions of parts?

I don’t think it is necessary to reproduce 



11.  Are the illustrations and tables necessary and acceptable?

Table 2 has serious flaws. The counts are not independent. 
 

12.  Are the key words and abstracts/summary informative?

13.  Is the paper
(c) acceptable for publication with major revisions only

14.  To what extent does this paper fall within your area of expertise?
( ) fully (X) well ( ) partially ( ) hardly

15.  Please list any other general comments or specific suggestions below.




